---
editor_options: 
  markdown: 
    wrap: 72
---

This code was developed to conduct a population viability analysis (PVA)
for the reinforcement of Grauer's gorilla (Gorilla beringei graueri)
population in Mount Tshiabeirmu, Democratic Republic of Congo. The study
results are being considered for publication in the Journal of Wildlife
Management. If you choose to use any aspect of the code, please cite the
authors of this paper as well as the owner of this GitHub repository.

This repository can be downloaded directly from GitHub. It includes code
for two different PVA models, a Leslie matrix model as well as an
individual-based model (IBM). All of following files and folders
(case-sensitive) are needed to run the models:

**FILES:**

1.  **Function Definitions.R**

This file stores code for all unique functions used to create .csv files
and run population simulations. If you are unfamiliar with the R coding
language, avoid editing this code if you want to ensure that the
simulations run without errors. The Leslie matrices generated here and
used in this study are based on Bronikowski et al. (2016) mountain
gorilla life history data.

2.  **Run Simulations.R**

In this file, the user defines the initial conditions of the
reinforcement to run both the Leslie matrix and individual-based model
simulations. This file calls functions stored in "Function
Definitions.R" file. The user will have to choose the appropriate
working directories before running the code.

3.  **Create Graphs.R**

In this file, the user creates graphs based on the output files created
generated by the "2. Run Simulations.R" file. These .jpg images are
listed in order of their appearance within the study.

**FOLDERS:**

All of the following folders (including the internal input files) are
required to run the simulations:

-   **PVA_Figures**

This folder will store the figures generated by the "3. Create Graphs"
file.

-   **PVA_Input**

This folder stores the input files called by the "1. Function
Definitions.R" and "2. Run Simulations.R" files. It includes .csv files
of: gorilla life history data, three Leslie matrices for different
population growth rates, reintroduction scenarios for the Leslie matrix
and IBM models, and compiled survey data collected on the Tshiaberimu
population between 1959 and 2021.

-   **PVA_Output**

    -   **IBM_Projection**

    -   **LM_Projection**

    -   **Results**

This folder stores the output files generated by the "2. Run
Simulations.R" file. Results from each model are directly saved into
either the IBM_Projection or LM_Projection sub-folder. The population
sizes at each time step in the model projections, final population
sizes, as well as the extinction risks were directly calculated. These
results were saved as .csv files in the Results subfolder. Additional
sub-folders were created to store the individual simulation results
(n=1000) for both the Leslie matrix and IBM population projections, each
conducted with different demographic parameters (1%, 2% and 3.2% growth
rates). The user must create these sub-folders independently, depending
on which models they run.
